twenty-eight years ago I was a broken
man and you probably wouldn't be able to
tell that if you met me I had a good job
at a well-respected academic
institutions I dress well of course but
my insides were rotting away you see I
grew up in a family riddled with
addiction and as a kid I also struggled
coming to terms with my own sexuality
and even though I couldn't name it then
growing up as a gay kid just compounded
my issues of isolation and insecurities
but drinking took all of that away like
many I drank at an early age I continued
to drink my way through college and when
I finally did come out in the early
1980s about the only places to meet
other gay people to socialize to be
yourself for gay bars and what are you
doing gay bars you drink and I did a lot
my story is not unique
like millions of Americans my disease
progressed undiagnosed it took me to
people in places and things that I never
would have chosen you know and it wasn't
until an intersection with the law gave
me an opportunity to get care that I
began my journey of recovery and you
know my journey of recovery has been
filled with love and with joy but it
hasn't been without pain like many of
you I've lost too many friends and
family to this disease I've heard too
many heartbreaking stories of people who
lost loved ones to addiction and I've
also lost countless friends to HIV and
AIDS you know our current opioid
epidemic and the AIDS epidemic
tragically have much in common right now
we are in the midst of one of the
greatest health crises of our time
during 2014 alone
8,000 people died of drug overdoses
associated with prescription drugs and
heroin during the 1980s scores of people
were dying for HIV and AIDS public
officials ignored it some wouldn't even
utter the words they didn't want
treatment and tragically there were many
parallels with our current epidemic some
called it the gay plague they called for
quarantines they wanted to separate the
innocent victims from the rest of us I
was afraid we were losing this battle
because people were blaming us for being
sick public policy was being held
hostage by stigma and fear and also held
hostage work compassion care research
recovery and treatment but we changed
all that because out of the pain of
those deaths saw a social and political
movement AIDS galvanized us into action
to stand up to speak up and to act out
and it also galvanized the LGBT movement
we knew we were in a battle for our
lives because silence equaled death but
we changed and we made things happen and
right now we have the potential to see
the end of HIV and AIDS in our lifetime
these changes came in no small part by
the courageous yet simple decision for
people to come out to their neighbors to
their friends to their families and to
their co-workers years ago I was a
volunteer for the name's project this
was an effort started by Cleve Jones in
San Francisco to show that people who
died of AIDS had names and faces and
families and people who loved them
I still recall unfolding the AIDS
Memorial Quilt on the National Mall on a
brilliant day in October 1988 so
fast-forward to 2015 the Supreme Court
decision to strike down the ban on
same-sex marriage my husband Dave and I
walk over to the steps of the Supreme
Court to celebrate that decision with so
many other people and I couldn't help
but think how far we came around LGBT
rights and yet how far we needed to go
around issues of addiction when I was
nominated by President Obama could be
his director of drug policy I was very
open about my recovery and about the
fact that I was a gay man and at no
point during my confirmation process at
least that I know of
did the fact that I was a gay man come
to bear on my candidacy or my fitness to
do this job but my addiction did at one
point a congressional staffer said that
there was no way that I was going to be
confirmed by the United States Senate
because of my past despite the fact that
I had been in recovery for over 20 years
and despite the fact that this job takes
a little bit of knowledge around
addiction
so you know this is the stigma that
people with substance use disorders face
every single day and you know I have to
tell you it's still why I'm still more
comfortable coming out as a gay man than
I am about a person with a history of
addiction nearly every family in America
is affected by addiction yet
unfortunately too often it's not talked
about openly and honestly it's whispered
about it's met with derision and scorn
we hear these stories time and time
again on TV online we hear it from
public officials and we hear it from
family and friends you know and those of
us with an addiction we hear those
voices and somehow we believe that we
are less deserving of care and treatment
today in the United States only one in
nine people get care and treatment for
their disorder one in nine think about
that generally people with other
diseases get care and treatment if you
have cancer you get treatment if you
have diabetes you get treatment if you
have a heart attack you get emergency
services and you get referred to care
but somehow people with addiction have
to wait for treatment or often can't get
it when they need it and left untreated
addiction has significant dire
consequences and for many people that
means death or incarceration we've been
down that road before for too long our
country felt like we could arrest our
way out of this problem but we know that
we can't decades of scientific research
has shown that this is a medical issue
so this is a chronic medical condition
that people inherit and that people
develop so the Obama administration has
taken a different tact on drug policy
we've developed and implemented a
comprehensive plan to expand prevention
services treatment services early
intervention and recovery support we
push criminal justice reform we've
knocked down barriers to give people
second chances
we see public health and public safety
officials working hand in hand at the
community level we see police chiefs
across the country guiding people to
treatment instead of jail and
incarceration we see law enforcement
others and other first responders
reversing overdoses with naloxone to
give people a second chance for care the
Affordable Care Act is the biggest
expansion of substance use disorder
treatment in a generation and it also
calls for the integration of treatment
services within primary care but
fundamentally all of this work is not
enough unless we change the way that we
view people with addiction in the United
States
you know years ago when I finally
understood that I had a problem and I
knew that I needed help I was too afraid
to ask for it
I felt that people would think I was
stupid that I was weak willed that I was
morally flawed but I talk about my
recovery because I want to make change I
want us to see that we need to be open
and candid about who we are and what we
can do you know I am public about my own
recovery not to be self congratulatory I
am open about my own recovery to change
public opinion to change public policy
and to change the course of this
epidemic and empower the millions of
Americans who struggle with this journey
to be opening candid about who they are
you know people are more than their
disease and all of us have the
opportunity to change public opinion and
to change public policy all of us know
someone who has an addiction and all of
us can do our part to change people how
we view people with addiction in the
United States so when you see someone
with an addiction don't think of a drunk
or a junkie or an addict or an abuser
see a person offer them help give them
kindness and compassion and
together we can be part of a growing
movement in the United States to change
how we view people with addiction
together we can change public policy we
can ensure that people get care when
they need it just like any other disease
we can be part of a growing unstoppable
movement to have millions of Americans
and to recovery and put an end to this
epidemic thank you very much
[Applause]